Blog: Feature flags vs configuration, what should you choose? (#6193)
PostHog/posthog.com: contents/blog/feature-flags-vs-configuration.md

---
title: "Feature flags vs configuration: what should you choose?"
date: 2023-06-27
author: ["ian-vanagas"]
showTitle: true
rootpage: /blog
sidebar: Blog
hideAnchor: true
featuredImage: ../images/blog/posthog-engineering-blog.png
featuredImageType: full
category: Engineering
tags:
 - Guides
 - Feature flags
 - Explainers
---

> Sometimes you want to change the behavior of your app without changing the code. Both feature flags and configurations are options for doing this. 
> 
> In their most basic form, they are a key you add to your code that returns a value you can control. You can use this value to change the behavior or experience of your app or product.
> 
> This post goes over what configuration and feature flags do, and which one you should choose.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Sometimes you want to change the behavior of your app without changing the code. Both feature flags and configurations are options for doing this, but it may not be clear which is the right option to use.

This post compares configurations and feature flags, and how to choose the right one for your use case.
```

## What is a configuration?

> A configuration, or config, is literally the definition above. A key when called with a service returns a value. You set both the key and value, then add the key and service to your code. You can then modify the key’s value. Configurations are often separated into a dedicated file or even handled by an external service. 

Reviewer: "is literally the definition above" didn't help me understand it.

What is a "service" in this context? A library? Framework? something else? Let's clarify it

```suggestion
A configuration enables you to call a key with a service and return a specific value. You set both the key and value, and then add the key and service to your code. You can then modify the key’s value. Configurations are often separated into a dedicated file or even handled by an external service. 
```

Author: Rewrote to clarify

> An example of a configuration is a secret key for an external service like Stripe or AWS set in an environment variable. It is set in a `.env` file or by using the `export` keyword in bash and accessed with a module like `dotenv` or `os`.

Reviewer: nice example

![env file](../images/blog/feature-flags-vs-configuration/env.png)

At a technical level, configurations are often set at compile or load time and don’t change. This means the app needs to be re-complied or restarted to make a change to the configuration. Because of this, developers expect they won’t change often; for example, they aren’t used to provide multiple different values during the same session.

> When an app deploys, configurations (and environment variables) are often handled by the service hosting. For example, Vercel, Netlify, and Render let you easily set and access environment variables, while Firebase, Azure, and AWS all have configuration management services for large, elaborate enterprise products.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When an app deploys, configurations (and environment variables) are often handled by the service hosting the app. For example, Vercel, Netlify, and Render let you easily set and access environment variables, while Firebase, Azure, and AWS all have configuration management services for large, elaborate enterprise products.
```

> Developers assume configurations will be permanent. Values might change, but they plan for that key and its associated value to always be important. This means versioning is critical for some configurations. Versioning helps debug potential issues related to code controlled by configs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Developers assume configurations will be permanent. Values might change, but they plan for that key and its associated value to always be important. This means versioning is critical for some configurations. Versioning helps debug potential issues related to code controlled by configs.
```

> **Note:** Configurations can be environment variables, but they aren’t exclusively. They can be key-value pairs stored anywhere in your stack.

### What is remote configuration?

A remote configuration, or remote config, is a configuration that can be set and changed remotely. This means a developer can change the value for users without needing to change any code. [Firebase](https://firebase.google.com/docs/remote-config) popularized this, but it also exists for [Unity](https://unity.com/products/remote-config) and many other services.

> Remote config is especially relied on for mobile apps. This is because mobile apps must go through an especially long review process, which can take 24-48 hours. If an issue pops up, this review process delays shipping a fix. If an app uses remote configs, it can mitigate (turn off) the problem feature immediately.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Remote config is especially relied on for mobile apps. This is because mobile apps must go through an especially long review process, which can take at least 24-48 hours. If an issue pops up, this review process delays shipping a fix. If an app uses remote configs, it can mitigate (turn off) the problem feature immediately.
```

The big difference compared to configurations is feature flags’ expanded functionality:

- Contains more data, like multiple variants and JSON.
- Connects to usage and user data.
- Provides simplified creation UI and permissioning.

To access these, feature flag services often connect to external services like CDPs, product analytics, and data warehouses. They get data from these sources to customize which users get specific values when calling the flag.

Feature flags are almost always remotely configurable, and because they use an external service, developers can modify them at run time. No need to reset or recompile, just call the external service again. These services also provide a simplified UI, creating a centralized location for modifying feature flags and enabling quick rollouts and rollbacks.

An example use case of a feature flag is rolling a new feature into beta. A conditional statement wraps the beta feature to check the value of the flag. The feature flag service evaluates if the user is part of the beta, and either grants or denies the user access.

![Feature flag video](../images/blog/feature-flags-vs-configuration/feature-flag.mp4)

> As showcased by this use case, feature flags are often meant to be temporary. Once you test and fully release a feature, you can remove the flag from the code. The failure to remove it creates technical debt.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As showcased by this use case, feature flags are often meant to be temporary. Once you test and fully release a feature, you can remove the flag from the code. The failure to remove it can create technical debt.
```

> > **Testing feature flags and configurations:** another problem both face is testing. Feature flags need to be mocked to test all potential paths, while configs are often forgotten in testing altogether. Both can cause [massive issues](https://github.com/danluu/post-mortems#config-errors). For a tutorial, see "[Testing frontend feature flags with React, Jest, and PostHog](/tutorials/test-frontend-feature-flags)."

Reviewer: Should probably be it's own section

```suggestion
> ## Testing feature flags and configurations

A problem both face is testing. Feature flags need to be mocked to test all potential paths, while configs are often forgotten in testing altogether. Both can cause [massive issues](https://github.com/danluu/post-mortems#config-errors). 

For a tutorial on how to best test feature feature flags, see "[Testing frontend feature flags with React, Jest, and PostHog](/tutorials/test-frontend-feature-flags)."
```

## Which should you choose?

Like many tech choices, you should think about what is the simplest solution for your objective. This table summarizes the differences between the two:

<div className="overflow-x-auto -mx-5 px-5">

> <table className="w-full mt-4" style="min-width: 600px;">

Reviewer: nice table

---

> title: "Feature flags vs configuration: what should you choose?"

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
title: "Feature flags vs configuration: Which should you choose?"
```

> date: 2023-06-28

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
date: 2023-06-30
```

author: ["ian-vanagas"]
showTitle: true
rootpage: /blog
sidebar: Blog
hideAnchor: true
featuredImage: ../images/blog/posthog-engineering-blog.png
featuredImageType: full
category: Engineering
tags:
 - Guides
 - Feature flags
 - Explainers
---

> Sometimes you want to change the behavior of your app without changing the code. Both feature flags and configurations are options for doing this, but it may not be clear which is the right option to use.
> 
> This post compares configurations and feature flags, and how to choose the right one for your use case.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Sometimes you want to change the behavior of your app without changing the code. Both feature flags and configurations are options for doing this. This guide explains each method, and how to choose the right one for your use case.
```
